Despite all of your best efforts,
you will never be able to create
an all encompassing algorithm that works in every clinical situation.
The FDA needs to be explicitly told about
these limitations as part of the guidance documentation to the end user as well.
In the first part of this lesson,
we talked about indications for use of an algorithm,
which tells the FDA when and where the algorithm could be used.
To interpret it another way,
the indication for use in forums,
the FDA of the limitations of the algorithm.
However, we do need to know what the real limitations are.
Remember we mentioned several times about how if
an algorithm was not trained on people over 80,
then it probably should not be used on people over 80.
Although it is in the indications for youths,
it is more like a limitation because we don't
really know how it would perform on people over 80.
If we had the data to train,
the algorithm might work just fine.
When the FDA talks about limitations,
they want to know more about scenarios where
your algorithm is not safe and effective to use.
In other words, where we know that our algorithm will fail in
such a way that it could pose potential risks
to patients if it were used in that setting.
For example, maybe your algorithm does not
perform well if a patient has a history of disease.
In this example, the algorithm's specificity drops a lot.
If the patient has a prior history of cancer.
We will want to disclose to the FDA that we know
that our algorithm will not perform well on these individuals.
In turn, the FDA may ask you to list this as
something that your algorithm is specifically not indicated for.
So in terms of algorithmic limitations,
our goal is to notify the FDA of all of
the situations where we know our algorithm will fail.
You may be wondering,
how will I know of all the possible situations where my algorithm might fail?
You can't test every possible scenario.
Lucky for patients, but maybe not so lucky for you.
The FDA will follow you in your algorithm for ever.
After your algorithm is cleared by the FDA and released out into the clinical world.
The FDA has a system called medical device reporting to
continuously monitor whether or not
your algorithm is malfunctioning out there in the world.
Anytime one of your end-users discovers a malfunction in your software,
they report this back to you,
the manufacturer, and you are required to report it back to the FDA.
Depending on the severity of the malfunction and whether or not it is life threatening,
the FDA will either completely recall your device or archive for you to
update its labeling and explicitly state new limitations that have been encountered.
Now there are other types of limitations besides their algorithm failing
in certain patient populations or when other types of diseases that are present.
There are also computational limitations that your consumer must be made aware of.
Let's return to an example that we've talked about a lot in this course.
Say that you built a CNN that can pretty
accurately identify emergency situation brain bleeds.
What you really think it should be used for is in helping in
the radiologist workflow to be prioritized.
You'd say it's intended use is to simply assist a radiologist in the diagnosis of brain
bleeds.You could then suggest in your indications for
use that this could be used for the workflow of re-prioritization.
But what do we know that we need in order for this to work?
Well, if we're suggesting that it could be used in
an emergency situation then it needs to run fast.
What would be required for this type of speed?
Probably some high-powered processor,
maybe cloud infrastructure or a GPU.
So you would want to list that one of your algorithmic limitations is that it does not
achieve fast performance in the absence of such types of computational infrastructure.
This would let your end consumer know that if the device was right for them,
given their hospital infrastructure and what they
wanted to do with it.As you might imagine,
all of these potential limitations may really limit your algorithms clinical utility.
But in fact, having a device that's very specific may actually be a good thing.
Choosing a narrow scope when designing your device is a good strategy,
especially if you can strategically choose something that maximizes market impact.
For example, if you know that a particular scanner is the most common type of
mammography device and that most women
receiving screening mammography are between 40 and 60,
then you still may end up with an incredibly useful and marketable algorithm if it is
only labeled for use in women from 40-60 who are scanned by this particular scanner.
You can always expand your devices functionality over
time and work with the FDA to get new expansions approved.
This is a much faster go-to-market strategy
than trying to boil the ocean in your first attempt,